---
layout: portfolio
title: "Stuff I Want"
image: "/art/desk.jpg"
---

There's a separate page for <a href='/etc/vinyl-interests'>vinyl
records</a>.

Email <mail@tnwae.us> if you have something I want; name your price.

## Computers and computer accessories

3x8GB DDR3-1333 SDRAM DIMM, tri-channel set.  I want to max out my
desktop at 48 GB until I can afford a good Zen motherboard and CPU.

Nvidia GeForce GTX video card of some sort.  I need lots of VRAM and
CUDA cores for Iray rendering, so I'm thinking the 1070 Ti would be my
best bet.  My system might accommodate two video cards (I've got the PSU
for it, but I'll have to move some expansion cards), so I'd definitely
be willing to investigate a dual-card setup.  (I love the idea of more
than 2,000 CUDA cores.)

I'm also interested in speccing a dual-processor Westmere board.  This
has to be a dual-LGA1366 board in the Full ATX (not E-ATX) form factor.
This is, of course, depending on the availability of such a board with
16-lane PCIe slots, which may not exist.  I'd be open to a Zen board
with an AM4 processor, something like the Ryzen 1700X, with about 32 GB
of DDR4 RAM.

## Cameras and camera accessories

Minolta SR-T 303b, preferably with the MC Rokkor-PG 50/1.4 prime.

Nikon F2S Photomic, preferably with the AI Nikkor 50/1.4 prime.

Canon FD 135/2.5 tele prime.

Canon FD 17/4 SSC ultra-wide prime.

Canon F-1 body, preferably with the 55/1.2 SSC prime.

Canon AT-1 or AE-1 body.

Any decent screw-mount M42 SLR made in Japan or the USSR, e.g. Zenit,
Pentax, Fujica, Cosina, etc.

Pentax 67 medium format body (looks like a K1000 on growth hormones),
with the left-hand grip, 105/2.4 prime (SMC Takumar), 135/4
Macro-Takumar, and 45/4 wide prime (SMC Pentax).  Also the 200/4, 400/4,
and 600/4 primes are of interest, all Takumars.

## Hi-fi stuff

A turntable with interchangeable headshells and support for playing at
78rpm, along with suitable styli for playing various vintages of 78s.
I like the looks of the Audio-Technica AT-LP120-USB, with its built-in
preamp.  I like the looks of the Shure M97XE or Nagaoka MP100.

A phono preamp with flat and RIAA output.  Having access to several
different equalization curves would be ideal if I ever get seriously
into collecting 78s, but flat output would allow me to apply any curve I
wanted to in software.

## A/V stuff

A LaserDisc player with a suitable DTS decoder.  My TV doesn't have
S-video in, so a converter box to HDMI would be essential.  I'm
primarily interested in collecting concert footage on LD (see also: the
vinyl page).

A SelectaVision VideoDisc player (aka CED player).  Again, I'm primarily
interested in collecting concerts on CED, providing that there aren't
any that aren't also available on VHS, Beta, or LD.  I can't imagine
that this is the case, seeing as I can't find anything suggesting that
there were any titles unique to the CED format.  (Mostly, I want the
1982 Simon &amp; Garfunkel concert in Central Park on CED, even if I
never play it.)

A Betamax VCR, preferably one capable of playing SuperBeta tapes.  I'm
interested in concert footage and off-air TV recordings from the
Knoxville area and surrounding areas.

A VHS VCR, because (incredibly), I haven't owned one in years and would
like to have one to watch childhood tapes on.

## Apple shit

17" iMac G5 or Intel Core Duo.  The Core Duo would be preferable since
it can run Snow Leopard.  In either case, it is going to be a media box
with its own screen, connected to my amplifier and a turntable so I can
use it as a music box and vinyl ripper.  Thus, Front Row support is
essential, as is the use of the Apple Remote, and thus I want an older
Mac.  (Snow Leopard is the last OS X version featuring Front Row
support.)  An Apple TV (original design with component out) would be a
decent substitute, I suppose, especially if it were hacked.

Retina MacBook, 2015 or 2016 version.  Space Grey.

Apple ephemera, particularly from the mid-90s, including posters,
T-shirts, bags, mouse mats, and stationery.

## Et c&aelig;tera

University of Tennessee football and Halls High School (Knoxville, TN)
football programs, especially from between 2006 and 2011 (Tennessee) and
between 2002 and 2006 (HHS).

No. 16 Tennessee football jersey.  (Or No. 92, or No. 23 or 24 Lady
Vols.)

No. 18 Peyton Manning Broncos jersey.  (Or No. 58 Von Miller, or No. 7
John Elway, or No. 44 Floyd Little, or No. 87 McCaffrey, or No. 77
Mecklenburg, or No. 53 Gradishar.  Really, any great Bronco in the
franchise's history would work, but Manning, Miller, McCaffrey, and
Elway are my favorites.)

No. 34 David Ortiz Red Sox jersey.  (Or No. 45 Martinez, No. 9 Williams,
No. 6 Pesky, No. 26 Boggs, No. 41 Sale, No. 15 Pedroia, No. 2 Bogaerts,
or No. 19 Bradley Jr.)

Sun Microsystems ephemera, especially pertaining to SPARC, Solaris, and
their server line.

