---
layout: post
title: "Chromebook Pixel: The Worst Best Laptop"
image: "/art/heroes/thinkpad-chromebook.jpg"
description: "Nicer than a ThinkPad."
music: "ZZ Top &mdash; Sharp Dressed Man"
mood: connected
category: Hardware

permalink: "/archives/323"
---

I really, really wanted to hate the Chromebook Pixel as a concept when
it first came out.  Indeed, it seems like a fundamentally flawed
concept, something so far beyond sanity -- a luxury budget laptop,
*really?* -- that nobody would buy it, Google would declare it a hideous
failure, and the world would continue to worship collectively at the
feet of Apple.  Of course, I was 100% accurate on one count: the Pixel
is, relatively speaking, an unsuccessful product despite a second
revision released in 2015.  But for a 2013 laptop, one that I bought new
in 2017 (which just goes to show...) from a surplus dealer, it's pretty
decent despite some small issues here and there.  But decent isn't the
whole story.  The Pixel is, by no small measure, the worst best laptop
I've ever used.  It disappoints, not because it's bad, but because I
can't find anything bad to say about it.

## The Hardware

<figure>
  <img class='img-responsive' src='https://files.tnwae.us/annapurna.jpg'>
  <figcaption>
    Ain't she a beaut?
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Let's start with what the Pixel is: it is an impeccably constructed
ultraportable, thinner and sleeker than any laptop I've ever owned.
Component fitment is accurate to fractions of a millimeter, and the
aluminum body makes the keyboard have a pleasingly firm feel.  The
quality of the fitment blows away my Lenovo laptops and even puts my
older Apple gear to shame.  Apple may still be the undisputed kings of
hardware build quality, but Google put in a very nice effort indeed with
the Pixel.

### Input Devices

This, arguably, is where the Pixel shines outside of the obvious
advantages of the screen.  The keyboard is firm yet quiet, with
tastefully conservative backlighting (controlled with Alt and the
brightness keys), and instead of the antiquarian function keys (F2, F4,
and F5 being the only ones that got any regular use from yours truly),
you have a row of ten dedicated keys for Chrome OS:

* Back
* Forward
* Refresh
* Full-Screen
* View All Windows
* Brightness Down
* Brightness Up
* Mute
* Volume Down
* Volume Up

Flanking this row, on either side, are the standard Escape key and the
power button.  The glaring lack of five keys diminishes my enthusiasm,
however: I rather extensively use Home/End, PgUp/PgDn, and forward
Delete.  My Fn+Backspace reflex, honed from years of using Apple laptops
in various capacities, remains unabated, and this keyboard lacks an Fn
key to exercise it on.  Ctrl+Alt+Slash gives you an overlay with every
keyboard shortcut in Chrome OS, however, so I rather quickly learned
that Alt+Delete makes up for the lack of a forward delete key, while
Alt+Up gives you PgUp and Alt+Down gives you PgDn.  As a PC refugee,
this actually matters quite a bit to me.  (Ctrl+Alt+Up gives you Home,
and Ctrl+Alt+Down gives you End.  I'd rather have these reversed, or
perhaps, I'd rather see Google enabling a Vimperator-like plugin for
Chrome.)

The touchpad is large, and made of glass, which makes it far more
pleasant to use than the cheap, plasticky touchpad of my old IdeaPad.
Tracking with the finger gestures is smooth, precise, and confident,
more akin to a touchscreen than to anything else.  I'm generally a fan
of non-touchpad input devices and would take a good mouse, or a
TrackPoint, over one any day of the week.  Tap-to-click is enabled by
default, and palm detection works out of the box.  Nice touches, Google.

I didn't test the touchscreen much.  I'm not a big fan of touchscreens,
for one thing, and I prefer the ones on my Nexus 7 tablet and Samsung
Galaxy phone.  However, compared to the touchscreens on my Windows touch
devices (my old IdeaPad and my much newer Nextbook tablet), it's
probably the best touchscreen not by Asus or Samsung that I've ever
used.

### Output Devices

The screen is the best panel I've ever laid eyes on.  Cranked up to full
brightness, it's ludicrously bright, and illumination is satisfyingly
uniform as you'd expect from a good IPS panel.  Because it's a 3:2
display (at a native resolution of 2560x1700), the Pixel's screen has a
nice, high density and text is pleasing to read.

The speakers are located beneath the keyboard and so sound just seems to
emanate from the Chromebook.  They're rather loud for laptop speakers,
too, and when I loaded up Florence + the Machine, long one of my
favorite artists, both singer and band sounded livelier than they have
through any other laptop speakers I've ever used.  As you'd expect from
a small speaker, it's rather lacking in the low end, and a bit tinny in
the high end.  I suppose that comparing them even to the cheap Polks I'm
using with my hi-fi set, or to my $100 Sennheiser headphones from 2009,
is an unfair comparison.  Music did sound much cleaner and more dynamic
through the aforesaid headphones, evidence that Google saw fit to put in
a good sound processor.  I loaded up the Tejano pop classic "Amor
Prohibido" by the one and only Selena, and I must say that I felt as
though I was in the studio with her, and when I switched from that to a
stream of the classic Paul Simon album, _Still Crazy After All These
Years_, I found that it sounds almost as good through the sound system
as it does on the original vinyl.  The electropop to which I have an
unlikely weakness (Marina and the Diamonds, Ellie Goulding, and Tove Lo,
among others) sounds pretty good, too.  Overall, as a hardcore music
listener, I think this laptop will be quite serviceable, headphones or
no.

### Connectivity

Google kept the connectivity options simple on the Pixel.  You get one
headphone port, one SD card slot, one SIM card slot, two USB ports (both
of them 2.0, despite Panther Point's support for USB 3.0), and one Mini
DisplayPort to add a second monitor.  The USB ports are thoughtfully
spaced apart so that I can use a mouse dongle (I'm using a cheap
Microsoft mouse -- say what you like about their software, but their
hardware is generally decent to great) and my external SD card reader at
the same time.  (Hat tip to Transcend here, BTW -- the slot on the SD
reader is on the proper side to let me use a card with this laptop in
the rear USB port!)  The only problem I see is the lack of Ethernet, but
a USB-to-Ethernet dongle should just work.

The lack of USB 3.0 isn't the glaring omission it seems.  I can hook up
my 500 GB hard drive (Chrome OS, by the way, can read NTFS just fine)
and stream videos (DVD-quality, mind you; I have no HD media to test
with) to the built-in media player with no issue.  Another hat-tip is
due here, this time to Google: I was able, without any problems
whatsoever, to play back DVD rips using the Matroshka container format
and several different A/V codecs within the Matroshka files, to the
point that this boy _don't need no steenkin' Netflix_.  A couple of
series that I ripped weren't quite so successful in the playback
department, but I forget the codecs I used on those files and I'm not
surprised if Chrome OS chokes on a few of them.  (The media player could
stand to do a better job of deinterlacing the DVD rips, I will say
that.)

### Performance

The first-gen Chromebook Pixel comes with an Intel Core i5-3427U
low-voltage processor.  Said processor is hyperthreaded so that you
appear to have four processors, and while this does increase
performance, one of the tradeoffs of using a low-voltage chip is that
you're slower to begin with.  Performance is surprisingly lively with
the low-voltage chip, to the point where at times I found myself
forgetting that it wasn't a full-blown (read: full-voltage) Ivy Bridge
processor.  As someone who's used an eight-thread laptop for the bulk of
the past 3-1/2 years, I find it surprising that I can so easily forget
that I'm not on a fire-breathing Core i7, with all the heat that thing
generates (hey, it is a 45W chip!).

Wireless performance is also quite nice, with the 802.11n card achieving
decent speeds between the Pixel and my Asus router.  I wasn't able to
test the 4G card since Verizon stopped providing Pixel owners with free
data in 2014, and I don't have a suitable AT&T card to test with.
(While I suppose I could pull the one out of my phone, I'm not about
to.)  The 4G card is purportedly unlocked and will (again, purportedly)
work with any 4G LTE provider (read: Sprint, Verizon, T-Mobile, AT&T,
Rogers, etc., etc.) anywhere in the USA or Canada.  I may test this in
the future, but for me personally, the provision of a 4G connection is
of limited value.  I rarely find myself in a situation where I (a) need
a laptop, (b) I need an Internet connection, and (c) I can't lean on my
phone's hotspot capability for the few minutes to an hour that I'll need
connectivity.  When I go to the coffeehouse to blog, I use my hotspot so
that I'm not on the wide-open public Wi-Fi where _gods know what_ is
going on.  If I were desperate to be hacked, I'd use public Wi-Fi, but
I'm not, so I at least make sure my connection to AT&T is encrypted
against nearby nefarious ninnies.

## The Software

The great hardware in the Pixel -- even with the processor's debatable
performance, means nothing without a good software experience.  I've
been a full-time Chrome user since 2010, and I've toyed around with the
browser since it came out in 2008.  Here's the rub with regard to the
software experience: **Most of what I do nowadays can be done remotely
in one way or another.**  Yes, I do need a full-blown Linux environment,
down to the very basic command line tools, when I develop a Jekyll site.
But I can set up a development server, link it to the Internet, and
develop with gay abandon.  To this end, my development environment can
be accessed from any kind of computer, using any kind of client (as long
as it's ssh), and the result can be pushed to my production server
without ever touching my local computer.  So, as alluring as installing
Slackware on the Chromebook is -- and it's a damn intriguing thought, if
nothing else -- I don't think I'll bother.  Chrome OS offers me the No.
1 and No. 2 things I need from a computer in 2017:

1. A Web browser
2. A Secure Shell client

The SSH client is my gateway to everything else I could want or need:
Ruby, Node, Gulp, Jekyll, the whole bit.  The one unassailable loss, for
which I have yet to find a satisfactory replacement, is Claws-Mail, and
that might be worth running a chroot for.  Thankfully, Crouton would
have me covered in that circumstance.

Oh, and three years of a terabyte of Google Drive?  Yeah, this laptop
already paid for itself, to the tune of $360.

### Hey, it *is* Linux-based, after all...

Chrome OS is based on Gentoo Linux.  This means that you can, with
appropriate levels of technical sleight of hand, run another Linux
environment from within a chroot.  _Crouton_ allows me to do such a
thing without much fussing around.  All you have to do is enable
Developer mode (which makes booting take longer, and which obliterates
your physical security) and then download the Crouton script, which you
have to run as root.  From there, you can install your chosen target
(since all I want is access to Claws-Mail, and the odd spot of X11
forwarding, I stuck with the simple XFCE, enriched with the few apps I'd
want or need) and, once you're inside the chroot, it's mostly like any
Ubuntu installation you'd ordinarily use.  Yes, I know Ubuntu is a
systemd Linux, but I'm (1) entirely too lazy to try making a Crouton
target for Slackware and (2) entirely too lazy, and chickenshit, to open
my brand-new laptop, remove the write-protect screw, and write a custom
firmware.  To access my preferred email client (with GnuPG, no less) and
to occasionally visit my sites in Firefox as a testing measure, I'm OK
with this.  The nice thing about Crouton is that you can run it
alongside Chrome OS and use Ctrl+Alt+Shift+Forward (and
Ctrl+Alt+Shift+Back) to switch between the two.

## So why is this the worst best laptop?

The concept, on its very face, seems positively ridiculous.  A laptop
that, when new, cost $1,449?  For running exactly one program, that
program being a web browser?  At first blush, the extravagant build
quality and high-end feature set seems like a terrific waste of a
computer for such a task, especially with the whole point of the
Chromebook concept being a laptop that you can buy for less than $300 or
so, use for a year or two, then dispose of before replacing it with
another one.  In other words, it's Google's take on the concept of
turning a computer into an appliance.  There are two things, however,
about Chrome OS and the Chromebook concept that would make it
worthwhile:

1. It automatically updates, with the updates pushed out silently and
unobtrusively.
2. Until its battery refuses to charge, or the demands of the Web become
too great for its processor, the Chromebook needs no maintenance aside
from an occasional cleaning.

I'll end this review by saying this: I would not have bought this laptop
when it was brand new.  Part of the reason why is that I didn't have
$1500 to spend on a computer the last time I was in the market to
upgrade; indeed, the $850 I spent on my IdeaPad was rather a stretch.
The other part of the reason why is that when I first heard about the
Chromebook concept -- of a deliberately feature-limited laptop designed
for simplicity rather than brute force or strength -- I couldn't stop
laughing.  Years later, with the massive misstep that is Windows 10 now
part of Microsoft's history of missteps, and with Apple tightening down
the Mac platform even more, I think part of Google's vision of the
Chromebook has been vindicated.

I thought the concept of the Chrome thin client was bullshit when I
first encountered it.  That's why, when I started to write this review,
I wanted to find something -- _anything_ -- unfavorable to say about
this laptop.  But it's a damn fine machine, an oddity and a cult
classic, and it emanates the same kind of geek chic that Google does so
well with many of its other products.  If I ever tire of Chrome OS,
Slackware is right around the corner.  (And while I'm in there, I will
apply better thermal paste.  You can bet your bottom dollar on that.)

4-1/2 stars.  I can't find much to say it about that isn't
complimentary.
