---
layout: post
title: "F1r5t P05t!"
category: Bullshit
---

Hey there, asshole.  You look lost.  Might I interest you in a better
website?  No?  Well, you'd better keep reading just to see what the fuck
this shit's all about.

## Who I Am

My name is William Ellison, otherwise known as "that asshole with the
MacBook Pro."  I am a highly opinionated fuckhead eager to
get the hell out of Knoxville, Tennessee.  My business card would say I
work in healthcare as an accounts receivable rep, which is a fancy way
of saying that I get paid to fuck with insurance companies to make sure
my doctors get paid.  What the fuck ever, it's a fucking living.

But I'm a software developer.  I get paid the princely wage of $0.00 per
whatever to fuck around with TypeScript, Python, HTML/CSS, Microsoft
Azure, and a bunch of other technical shit.  If you want to nerd out
with me, there's a whole stable's worth of technical horseshit at my
tech blog, <https://waellison.blog>.  That's this site's boring,
professional, and really fucking nerdy cousin.

## What This Site Is

This site is my soapbox, and you're welcome to like it or lump it.  I
ain't yer momma.

In seriousness, I plan on writing about video games, music, computer
hardware, and probably some other shit here as desire dictates.  There
may even be some book reviews, depending on how ambitious I feel like
getting.  In any case, this site is going to be a repository for all the
shit that doesn't fit in on the dot-blog site.

## What This Site Is Not

This site isn't a technical blog, although I may veer close to technical
territory.

## Onward toward the future

I don't know what the future holds for this site.  I just write what the
fuck I want, come what may.

Don't be an asshole, even if you know in your heart of hearts that the
other guy deserves it.

