---
layout: portfolio
description: "Time I spent serving as a volunteer."
title: "Service: tnwae Gives Back"
image: "//files.tnwae.us/heroes/ktown.jpg"
toc: true
---

In 2012 and 2013, and again in 2017, I gave back to the community
through volunteer work.  This is an account of some of the more notable
things I have done as a volunteer.

## Volunteer Ministry Center (2012-2013)

### Old PC restoration

I started work at VMC in late 2012 and my first responsibility was to go
through a pile of old PCs and see if any of them could be meaningfully
restored and redeployed.  I ultimately got four useful machines out of
the pile, deploying one to my own office and three elsewhere in the
building.  The restoration work was pretty easy for the most part:
cleaning off dusty fans and heatsinks, reinstalling Windows, and
scavenging old RAM and hard drives.  To my knowledge, at least two of
those PCs remained in daily use at the time of my last involvement with
VMC.

### Administration tasks

#### Remote work

I inherited the responsibility to maintain twelve workstations used by
clients, staff, and volunteers.  Three of these machines ran Windows 7
while the other nine ran Windows XP.  Seven of the machines (all XP
boxes) were located upstairs, so I configured RDC to make them
accessible from my office on the ground level.  One of the upstairs
machines ran Windows XP Home and required the use of TightVNC instead of
RDC.  The other five machines were close to my office and not blocked by
any locking doors, so they were easy to access physically.

#### Cleanup and cleanout

My tasks included cleaning out junk files, organizing files on the
computers, and running security scans.  To organize interview
transcripts taken by volunteers in the Refuge (see below), I wrote a
short batch file that moved the files into a predetermined directory on
disk, and it was a simple matter to schedule that batch file to run
weekly.

One of the Refuge PCs had a badly bungled Windows XP installation; a
well-meaning prior volunteer had installed Windows XP onto an 8 GB
partition (on a 500 GB hard drive, no less) and it was a simple fix to
back up the data, repartition the disk, and reinstall Windows followed
by Comodo (the antivirus in use), Firefox, and OpenOffice.

My office PC was an old point-of-sale terminal running Windows 2000;
since it had no optical drive, upgrading it wasn't an option.  Finding
utilities friendly to the old version of Windows was an adventure in and
of itself, but older versions of Firefox, OpenOffice, and the Microsoft
RDC client proved very useful indeed.  I was able to scavenge enough
parts to upgrade the machine from a Celeron processor to a full Pentium
III, which was a significant performance improvement.

#### Client boxes

In the Resource Center (see below), there are three PCs for the clients
to use in searching for housing, work, and skills training, as well as
for staying generally informed and for having access to email and social
networking.  My first tasks with these machines were to:

0. Stop users changing the wallpapers by configuring a Group Policy setting;

1. Stop users accessing video sites such as YouTube and Vimeo by
   blocking them in the Windows hosts file;

2. Scan the machines for malware and remove bad files downloaded by the
   users;

3. Clean out internet caches and other junk files to expedite disk
   defragmentation;

4. Defragment the hard disks to reduce file fragmentation and improve
   performance.

These tasks were made easier thanks to the improved security
infrastructure of Windows 7; I was able to log in as an administrator
and do what needed doing.

### Odd jobs

#### If it's broken, fix it

Once, I found a machine with a damaged power button; it had been off
since my last weekly visit, and it was a simple matter to pop off the
front panel, reseat the button, and turn the machine back on.

#### Better living through technology

We retired an old laptop and replaced it with a desktop that was newer,
faster, and generally better equipped for the task it was performing.  I
was asked to redo the laptop so it could be given to another volunteer,
which quite naturally made his day and raised my spirits too.

#### Closet emptying

I recieved at least three PCs out of closets scattered throughout the
building, as well as two computers out of someone's office.  They didn't
seem quite so useful, but it did free up space used for things more
germane to VMC's mission.

#### New hard drives

A security DVR and a desktop computer in Minvilla Manor experienced hard
drive failures almost at the same time; I recommended a good model of
hard drive (Seagate, for what it's worth) and offered to install them,
also reinstalling Windows on the desktop PC.

#### Cutting the wires

I was presented with two newly purchased wireless routers and told to
install one in Minvilla and one in the main building.  After doing so,
volunteers and staff were able to access the Internet wirelessly on all
VMC properties, which always makes things easier.

### A little bit about VMC

The Volunteer Ministry Center is a nondenominational Christian ministry
dedicated to preventing and ending homelessness in the Knoxville and
Knox County area.

Their role is to aid in the rehabilitation of those already experiencing
homelessness and to connect those at risk of homelessness to the
services they need, such as rent assistance, transportation vouchers,
job search aid, and services for victims of mental illness, domestic
violence, and other contributing factors to homelessness.

VMC's approach is called "housing-first," for it is their finding that
by addressing the housing problem first, all else will follow in
rehabilitating a homeless person toward permanent housing, or by keeping
those at risk in permanent housing.

To that end, they operate five units:

0. Administration: charged with running the organization.

1. The Refuge: provides a diverse array of services to those at risk of
   homelessness.  The Refuge is a person's first point of contact at
   VMC.

2. Dental Clinic: provides dentists and dental services.  Medical
   attention is provided by Cherokee Health, which has a clinic just down
   Fifth Avenue from Minvilla, but dental services are offered by volunteer
   dentists and hygienists at VMC.

3. Resource Center: provides services (counseling, job search aid, case
   management) to those experiencing homelessness, with an aim toward
   permanent housing; the first rung on the ladder to self-sufficiency

4. Minvilla Manor: permanent supportive housing for those formerly
   homeless; the second rung on the ladder toward self-sufficiency

The Volunteer Ministry Center is locaed at 511 N. Broadway, Knoxville,
TN 37917, or online at <http://vmcinc.org>.

## The MUSE (2017)

Coming soon.  The MUSE is a children's museum with interactive exhibits
dedicated to teaching the STEAM (= Science, Technology, Engineering,
Arts, and Mathematics) disciplines to chlidren of all ages.

